docs/APP_BRAIN_FLOW.md, before:

# App Brain, Memory, and Intelligence Flow

This diagram shows how Quill AI threads together the App Brain, the persistent memory system, and the deterministic intelligence layer when serving the agent.

```mermaid
graph TD
  UI[User Inputs & UI State] -->|cursor, selections, panels| Brain[(App Brain)]
  Manuscript[Manuscript & Lore Stores] -->|chapters, branches, lore| Brain
  Engine[Intelligence Engine] -->|HUD, entities, timeline| Brain
  MemorySvc[Memory Service] -->|memories & goals for context| Brain
  Brain -->|context builders (with memory)| Orchestrator[Agent Orchestrator]
  Orchestrator -->|tool calls & prompts| AgentLLM[Agent Session / LLM]
  AgentLLM -->|actions & critiques| Orchestrator
  Orchestrator -->|event bus updates| Brain
  MemorySvc <-->|Dexie persistence| DB[(IndexedDB)]
```

**Flow notes**

- The App Brain aggregates manuscript, UI, analysis, and intelligence signals into a single state container that every agent session can read from.
- Context builders pull in persisted memories and goals when the project ID is known so prompts include long-term knowledge alongside the live App Brain state.
- The agent orchestrator reads the App Brain state, initializes sessions with full manuscript and intelligence context, and streams tool executions back through the App Brain event bus.
- Memory CRUD flows through the memory service into IndexedDB, and the App Brain consumes the formatted memory slices when constructing prompts.

Commit message:

Add bedside-note planning memory documentation covering implementation, evolution triggers, and phased roadmap
- Document bedside-note as plan-type MemoryNote tagged meta:bedside-note in AGENT_TOOLS_REFERENCE.md
- Add memory chain evolution via useMemoryIntelligence and ProactiveThinker to AGENT_TOOLS_REFERENCE.md
- Update AGENT_ARCHITECTURE.md to include plans and bedside-note in memories table description
- Add bedside-note creation and reordering to APP_BRAIN_FLOW.md flow notes
- Add comprehensive

docs/APP_BRAIN_FLOW.md, after:

# App Brain, Memory, and Intelligence Flow

This diagram shows how Quill AI threads together the App Brain, the persistent memory system, and the deterministic intelligence layer when serving the agent.

```mermaid
graph TD
  UI[User Inputs & UI State] -->|cursor, selections, panels| Brain[(App Brain)]
  Manuscript[Manuscript & Lore Stores] -->|chapters, branches, lore| Brain
  Engine[Intelligence Engine] -->|HUD, entities, timeline| Brain
  MemorySvc[Memory Service] -->|memories & goals for context| Brain
  Brain -->|context builders (with memory)| Orchestrator[Agent Orchestrator]
  Orchestrator -->|tool calls & prompts| AgentLLM[Agent Session / LLM]
  AgentLLM -->|actions & critiques| Orchestrator
  Orchestrator -->|event bus updates| Brain
  MemorySvc <-->|Dexie persistence| DB[(IndexedDB)]
```

## Flow notes

- The App Brain aggregates manuscript, UI, analysis, and intelligence signals into a single state container that every agent session can read from.
- Context builders pull in persisted memories and goals when the project ID is known so prompts include long-term knowledge alongside the live App Brain state.
- The memory service also maintains a **bedside-note planning memory** per project (a `plan`-type `MemoryNote` tagged `meta:bedside-note`) and ensures it is surfaced at the top of the memory section in smart agent context. This bedside note is evolved over time via memory chains driven by analysis observation and proactive thinking.
- The agent orchestrator reads the App Brain state, initializes sessions with full manuscript and intelligence context, and streams tool executions back through the App Brain event bus.
- Memory CRUD flows through the memory service into IndexedDB, and the App Brain consumes the formatted memory slices when constructing prompts.
