docs/TESTING.md, before:

# Quill AI Testing Plan

> This document describes the testing strategy, health suite, and CI flow for Quill AI.  
> For **up‑to‑date coverage and gap analysis**, see:
>
> - [TEST_COVERAGE.md](./TEST_COVERAGE.md) – auto‑generated coverage report
> - [TEST_AUDIT.md](./TEST_AUDIT.md) – auto‑generated test gap audit
> - `coverage/index.html` – full HTML coverage report from Vitest

---

## Overview

Quill AI uses:

- **Vitest** for unit, integration, and component tests
- **V8 coverage** with hard **thresholds** enforced in Vite and CI:
  - Statements **≥ 80%**
  - Branches **≥ 75%**
  - Functions **≥ 80%**
  - Lines **≥ 80%**
- A **Test Health Suite** of Node scripts that:
  - Generate coverage docs
  - Track historical trends
  - Audit missing tests
  - Block regressions in CI

---

## Test Health Suite & CI Flow

### Local Commands

| Command | Purpose |
|--------|---------|
| `npm test` | Run all tests (no coverage, watch‑friendly in dev) |
| `npm run test:run` | Run tests once (no watch) |
| `npm run test:quick` | Fast dot‑reporter run for quick feedback |
| `npm run test:ui` | Open Vitest UI for focused debugging |
| `npm run test:coverage` | Run tests with coverage, write `coverage/coverage-summary.json` & HTML report |
| `npm run test:status` | Generate [docs/TEST_COVERAGE.md](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/docs/TEST_COVERAGE.md:0:0-0:0) + update `coverage/history.json` |
| `npm run test:audit` | Generate [docs/TEST_AUDIT.md](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/docs/TEST_AUDIT.md:0:0-0:0) (missing & stale tests) |
| `npm run test:regression` | Fail if coverage drops more than **2.0 points** vs baseline |
| `npm run test:docs` | Ensure [TEST_COVERAGE.md](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/docs/TEST_COVERAGE.md:0:0-0:0) / [TEST_AUDIT.md](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/docs/TEST_AUDIT.md:0:0-0:0) are **fresh** vs git HEAD date |
| `npm run test:docs:strict` | Ensure coverage docs in the working tree match committed generator output |
| `npm run test:full` | Convenience: `test:coverage` + `test:status` + `test:audit` in one command |

### Coverage Report Generation

Pipeline (matches the **Coverage Report Generation** codemap):

1. **Collect coverage**  
   - `npm run test:coverage` → Vitest writes `coverage/coverage-summary.json` and HTML report.
2. **Generate status report** ([scripts/generate-test-status.mjs](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/scripts/generate-test-status.mjs:0:0-0:0))  
   - Reads `coverage-summary.json` and optional `vitest-report.json`.  
   - Extracts total coverage metrics.  
   - Appends a snapshot to `coverage/history.json` (up to the last 100 runs).  
   - Writes [docs/TEST_COVERAGE.md](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/docs/TEST_COVERAGE.md:0:0-0:0) with:
     - Hero badge line (tests + coverage + date)
     - Coverage summary & threshold health
     - Test counts table
     - Coverage gaps & lowest‑coverage files
     - Historical coverage trend

### Test Gap Auditing

Flow (matches the **Test Gap Auditing** codemap):

1. **Scan source files**  
   - Scans [features/](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/tests/features:0:0-0:0), [services/](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/tests/services:0:0-0:0), [config/](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/tests/config:0:0-0:0), [types/](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/tests/types:0:0-0:0) for `.ts` / `.tsx`.
2. **Scan tests**  
   - Scans [tests/](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/tests:0:0-0:0) for `.test.ts` / `.test.tsx`.
3. **Identify missing tests**  
   - For each source file, looks for a matching test file by basename.  
   - If no match, it is added to **“Source Files Missing Tests”**.
4. **Detect stale tests**  
   - For each test file, checks if a corresponding source file exists.  
   - If not, it goes into **“Potentially Stale Test Files”** (may be integration tests or dead tests).
5. **Generate audit report**  
   - Writes summary + tables to [docs/TEST_AUDIT.md](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/docs/TEST_AUDIT.md:0:0-0:0) with a `Last updated:` stamp.

### Coverage Regression Checking

Flow (matches the **Coverage Regression Checking** codemap):

1. **Load current metrics**  
   - Reads `coverage/coverage-summary.json` → current statements/branches/functions/lines.
2. **Load baseline from history**  
   - Reads `coverage/history.json`.  
   - Uses the **previous snapshot** as the regression baseline.
3. **Compare metrics**  
   - Computes deltas between current and baseline.  
   - Applies `MAX_DROP` thresholds: **2.0 percentage points** per metric.
4. **Enforce outcome**  
   - If any metric drops by more than 2.0 points → exits with non‑zero status (CI failure).  
   - Otherwise prints a “NO REGRESSION” summary and succeeds.

### CI Workflow (GitHub Actions)

Flow (see [.github/workflows/tests.yml](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/.github/workflows/tests.yml:0:0-0:0)):

1. **Test execution phase**  
   - `npm run test:coverage` (with `CI=true`).
2. **Quality enforcement phase**  
   - `npm run test:regression` – block coverage regressions > 2 points.
3. **Documentation validation phase**  
   - `npm run test:docs` – coverage docs are recent vs HEAD commit date.  
   - `npm run test:docs:strict` – coverage docs match committed generator output.
4. **Coverage report on PRs**  
   - `davelosert/vitest-coverage-report-action@v2` posts coverage details as a PR comment.

> **Note:** CI does **not** regenerate docs. Doc generation (`test:status`, `test:audit`) is a **local** responsibility. See [Contributing Workflow](#contributing-workflow) below.

### Contributing Workflow

Coverage docs (`TEST_COVERAGE.md`, `TEST_AUDIT.md`) are **committed artifacts**. When your PR changes coverage:

```bash
# 1. Run the full test suite with doc generation
npm run test:full

# 2. Commit the updated docs alongside your code changes
git add docs/TEST_COVERAGE.md docs/TEST_AUDIT.md
git commit -m "Update coverage docs"
```

CI will **fail** if:

- Docs are missing or malformed
- Docs are stale (> 2 days older than HEAD commit)
- Docs don't match what the generators would produce

This ensures the repository always has accurate, up-to-date coverage documentation.

---

## Current Coverage & Thresholds

Exact percentages change frequently and are **not hard‑coded** here. To see them:

- **Snapshot report:** [docs/TEST_COVERAGE.md](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/docs/TEST_COVERAGE.md:0:0-0:0)
- **Historical trend:** `coverage/history.json` (latest 100 snapshots)
- **Gap analysis:** [docs/TEST_AUDIT.md](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/docs/TEST_AUDIT.md:0:0-0:0)
- **HTML report:** `coverage/index.html`

Thresholds enforced (in Vite + Test Health Suite):

- **Statements:** 80%+
- **Branches:** 75%+
- **Functions:** 80%+
- **Lines:** 80%+

CI additionally prevents **regressions** larger than **2.0 percentage points** relative to the previous snapshot.

---

## Definition of Done

Testing is considered **complete enough** when:

1. **80%+ statement coverage** on all non‑UI logic (services, stores, hooks, utilities).
2. **60%+ statement coverage** on React components (render + key interactions).
3. **All critical paths** have explicit tests:
   - Persistence / IndexedDB
   - AI calls and error handling
   - Branching, version control, and export flows.
4. **Zero regressions** – coverage cannot silently drop without CI failure.
5. **Docs stay in sync** – [TEST_COVERAGE.md](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/docs/TEST_COVERAGE.md:0:0-0:0) and [TEST_AUDIT.md](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/docs/TEST_AUDIT.md:0:0-0:0) are fresh and committed.

---

## Testing Phases

These phases describe **how we structure test work**, not current numeric coverage.

### Phase 1: Core Logic (Critical)

**Goal:** Cover business logic that doesn’t require React rendering.  
**Examples:**

- `services/gemini/*` – agent orchestration, prompts, token guards, parsing.
- `services/manuscriptParser.ts`, `services/manuscriptIndexer.ts` – manuscript parsing/indexing.
- `services/pdfExport.ts` – export pipeline.
- `config/*` – API/model configuration.

Most of these modules now have strong coverage; new logic should follow the same pattern.

### Phase 2: State Management (High)

**Goal:** Verify state machines, stores, and contexts.

- Zustand stores:
  - `features/project/store/useProjectStore.ts`
  - `features/settings/store/useSettingsStore.ts`
- React contexts:
  - `features/shared/context/EditorContext.tsx`
  - `features/shared/context/EngineContext.tsx`
  - `features/shared/context/UsageContext.tsx`
  - `features/analysis/context/AnalysisContext.tsx`

New stateful modules should add tests alongside their context/store files.

### Phase 3: Custom Hooks (High)

**Goal:** Cover hooks with `renderHook` and realistic mocks.

Key hook families:

- Agent + editor:
  - `features/agent/hooks/useAgentService.ts`
  - `features/agent/hooks/useAgenticEditor.ts`
- Editor:
  - `features/editor/hooks/useMagicEditor.ts`
  - `features/editor/hooks/useDocumentHistory.ts`
  - `features/editor/hooks/useBranching.ts`
  - `features/editor/hooks/useInlineComments.ts`
  - `features/editor/hooks/useEditorSelection.ts`
  - `features/editor/hooks/useAutoResize.ts`
- Shared & voice:
  - `features/shared/hooks/useDraftSmithEngine.ts`
  - `features/shared/hooks/usePlotSuggestions.ts`
  - `features/shared/hooks/useViewportCollision.ts`
  - `features/voice/hooks/useVoiceSession.ts`
  - `features/voice/hooks/useTextToSpeech.ts`
  - `features/voice/hooks/useAudioController.ts`

When adding new hooks, follow the same pattern: unit-test decision logic and side effects.

For the agent layer specifically, the shared Gemini tool-call loop and its orchestrators are covered by:

- `tests/services/core/agentToolLoop.test.ts` – pure helper loop behavior (tool rounds, abort paths).
- `tests/services/core/AgentController.test.ts` – `DefaultAgentController` usage of the loop and state transitions.
- `tests/hooks/useAgentOrchestrator.test.ts` – AppBrain-powered hook behavior, including tool round-trips and abort handling.

### Phase 4: React Components (Medium)

**Goal:** Render tests + key user interactions per component.

Focus on:

- Rich editor UI:
  - [features/editor/components/RichTextEditor.tsx](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/features/editor/components/RichTextEditor.tsx:0:0-0:0)
  - [features/editor/components/MagicBar.tsx](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/features/editor/components/MagicBar.tsx:0:0-0:0)
  - [features/editor/components/CommentCard.tsx](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/features/editor/components/CommentCard.tsx:0:0-0:0)
  - [features/editor/components/EditorWorkspace.tsx](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/features/editor/components/EditorWorkspace.tsx:0:0-0:0)
- Agent / analysis UI:
  - `features/agent/components/ChatInterface.tsx`
  - `features/analysis/components/AnalysisPanel.tsx`
- Project & visualization:
  - `features/project/components/ProjectDashboard.tsx`
  - `features/project/components/ImportWizard.tsx`
  - `features/lore/components/LoreManager.tsx`
  - `features/lore/components/KnowledgeGraph.tsx`
  - `features/voice/components/VoiceMode.tsx`

Tests should exercise **real user flows** (clicks, keyboard shortcuts, state transitions), not just snapshots.

### Phase 5: Integration Flows (Lower Volume, High Value)

**Goal:** End‑to‑end flows without a browser, using real stores + mocks at the boundaries.

Representative flows:

- Project lifecycle:
  - Create project → add chapter → save → reopen.
- Analysis:
  - Request analysis → receive results → render dashboards/panels.
- Agent:
  - Chat request → AI response → manuscript edit applied.

Existing tests in [tests/integration/](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/tests/integration:0:0-0:0) cover core flows; new high‑level features should add similar integration tests.

---

## Testing Patterns

### 1. Service Mocking (Gemini API)

```typescript
// tests/mocks/geminiClient.ts
vi.mock('@/services/gemini/client', () => ({
  getClient: () => ({
    models: { generateContent: vi.fn() }
  })
}));

Commit message:

``` docs: Raise coverage targets and clarify testing standards
Increase statement coverage targets to 95%+ for core logic and 75-90%+ for UI components. Add requirement for representative integration tests on new features. Clarify that CI thresholds are minimums and local work should aim higher. Normalize line endings in manuscriptParser to handle CRLF inputs. Fix window reference in test setup for non-browser environments. Expand environmentMatchGlobs to ensure jsdom is used for all component/

docs/TESTING.md, after:

# Quill AI Testing Plan

> This document describes the testing strategy, health suite, and CI flow for Quill AI.  
> For **up‑to‑date coverage and gap analysis**, see:
>
> - [TEST_COVERAGE.md](./TEST_COVERAGE.md) – auto‑generated coverage report
> - [TEST_AUDIT.md](./TEST_AUDIT.md) – auto‑generated test gap audit
> - `coverage/index.html` – full HTML coverage report from Vitest

---

## Overview

Quill AI uses:

- **Vitest** for unit, integration, and component tests
- **V8 coverage** with hard **thresholds** enforced in Vite and CI:
  - Statements **≥ 80%**
  - Branches **≥ 75%**
  - Functions **≥ 80%**
  - Lines **≥ 80%**
- A **Test Health Suite** of Node scripts that:
  - Generate coverage docs
  - Track historical trends
  - Audit missing tests
  - Block regressions in CI

---

## Test Health Suite & CI Flow

### Local Commands

| Command | Purpose |
|--------|---------|
| `npm test` | Run all tests (no coverage, watch‑friendly in dev) |
| `npm run test:run` | Run tests once (no watch) |
| `npm run test:quick` | Fast dot‑reporter run for quick feedback |
| `npm run test:ui` | Open Vitest UI for focused debugging |
| `npm run test:coverage` | Run tests with coverage, write `coverage/coverage-summary.json` & HTML report |
| `npm run test:status` | Generate [docs/TEST_COVERAGE.md](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/docs/TEST_COVERAGE.md:0:0-0:0) + update `coverage/history.json` |
| `npm run test:audit` | Generate [docs/TEST_AUDIT.md](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/docs/TEST_AUDIT.md:0:0-0:0) (missing & stale tests) |
| `npm run test:regression` | Fail if coverage drops more than **2.0 points** vs baseline |
| `npm run test:docs` | Ensure [TEST_COVERAGE.md](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/docs/TEST_COVERAGE.md:0:0-0:0) / [TEST_AUDIT.md](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/docs/TEST_AUDIT.md:0:0-0:0) are **fresh** vs git HEAD date |
| `npm run test:docs:strict` | Ensure coverage docs in the working tree match committed generator output |
| `npm run test:full` | Convenience: `test:coverage` + `test:status` + `test:audit` in one command |

### Coverage Report Generation

Pipeline (matches the **Coverage Report Generation** codemap):

1. **Collect coverage**  
   - `npm run test:coverage` → Vitest writes `coverage/coverage-summary.json` and HTML report.
2. **Generate status report** ([scripts/generate-test-status.mjs](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/scripts/generate-test-status.mjs:0:0-0:0))  
   - Reads `coverage-summary.json` and optional `vitest-report.json`.  
   - Extracts total coverage metrics.  
   - Appends a snapshot to `coverage/history.json` (up to the last 100 runs).  
   - Writes [docs/TEST_COVERAGE.md](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/docs/TEST_COVERAGE.md:0:0-0:0) with:
     - Hero badge line (tests + coverage + date)
     - Coverage summary & threshold health
     - Test counts table
     - Coverage gaps & lowest‑coverage files
     - Historical coverage trend

### Test Gap Auditing

Flow (matches the **Test Gap Auditing** codemap):

1. **Scan source files**  
   - Scans [features/](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/tests/features:0:0-0:0), [services/](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/tests/services:0:0-0:0), [config/](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/tests/config:0:0-0:0), [types/](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/tests/types:0:0-0:0) for `.ts` / `.tsx`.
2. **Scan tests**  
   - Scans [tests/](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/tests:0:0-0:0) for `.test.ts` / `.test.tsx`.
3. **Identify missing tests**  
   - For each source file, looks for a matching test file by basename.  
   - If no match, it is added to **“Source Files Missing Tests”**.
4. **Detect stale tests**  
   - For each test file, checks if a corresponding source file exists.  
   - If not, it goes into **“Potentially Stale Test Files”** (may be integration tests or dead tests).
5. **Generate audit report**  
   - Writes summary + tables to [docs/TEST_AUDIT.md](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/docs/TEST_AUDIT.md:0:0-0:0) with a `Last updated:` stamp.

### Coverage Regression Checking

Flow (matches the **Coverage Regression Checking** codemap):

1. **Load current metrics**  
   - Reads `coverage/coverage-summary.json` → current statements/branches/functions/lines.
2. **Load baseline from history**  
   - Reads `coverage/history.json`.  
   - Uses the **previous snapshot** as the regression baseline.
3. **Compare metrics**  
   - Computes deltas between current and baseline.  
   - Applies `MAX_DROP` thresholds: **2.0 percentage points** per metric.
4. **Enforce outcome**  
   - If any metric drops by more than 2.0 points → exits with non‑zero status (CI failure).  
   - Otherwise prints a “NO REGRESSION” summary and succeeds.

### CI Workflow (GitHub Actions)

Flow (see [.github/workflows/tests.yml](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/.github/workflows/tests.yml:0:0-0:0)):

1. **Test execution phase**  
   - `npm run test:coverage` (with `CI=true`).
2. **Quality enforcement phase**  
   - `npm run test:regression` – block coverage regressions > 2 points.
3. **Documentation validation phase**  
   - `npm run test:docs` – coverage docs are recent vs HEAD commit date.  
   - `npm run test:docs:strict` – coverage docs match committed generator output.
4. **Coverage report on PRs**  
   - `davelosert/vitest-coverage-report-action@v2` posts coverage details as a PR comment.

> **Note:** CI does **not** regenerate docs. Doc generation (`test:status`, `test:audit`) is a **local** responsibility. See [Contributing Workflow](#contributing-workflow) below.

### Contributing Workflow

Coverage docs (`TEST_COVERAGE.md`, `TEST_AUDIT.md`) are **committed artifacts**. When your PR changes coverage:

```bash
# 1. Run the full test suite with doc generation
npm run test:full

# 2. Commit the updated docs alongside your code changes
git add docs/TEST_COVERAGE.md docs/TEST_AUDIT.md
git commit -m "Update coverage docs"
```

CI will **fail** if:

- Docs are missing or malformed
- Docs are stale (> 2 days older than HEAD commit)
- Docs don't match what the generators would produce

This ensures the repository always has accurate, up-to-date coverage documentation.

---

## Current Coverage & Thresholds

Exact percentages change frequently and are **not hard‑coded** here. To see them:

- **Snapshot report:** [docs/TEST_COVERAGE.md](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/docs/TEST_COVERAGE.md:0:0-0:0)
- **Historical trend:** `coverage/history.json` (latest 100 snapshots)
- **Gap analysis:** [docs/TEST_AUDIT.md](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/docs/TEST_AUDIT.md:0:0-0:0)
- **HTML report:** `coverage/index.html`

Thresholds enforced (in Vite + Test Health Suite):

- **Statements:** 80%+
- **Branches:** 75%+
- **Functions:** 80%+
- **Lines:** 80%+

CI additionally prevents **regressions** larger than **2.0 percentage points** relative to the previous snapshot.

---

## Definition of Done

Testing is considered **complete enough** when:

1. **95%+ statement coverage** on all non‑UI logic (services, stores, hooks, utilities) at the project level. Individual files may be lower, but the overall core-logic layer should meet or exceed 95%.
2. **75%+ statement coverage** on React components overall, with **90%+** on critical surfaces (editor workspace, agent/chat flows, analysis dashboards, project dashboard/import flows).
3. **All critical paths** have explicit tests:
   - Persistence / IndexedDB
   - AI calls and error handling
   - Branching, version control, and export flows.
4. **Representative integration coverage** for new high‑level features:
   - At least one integration test in `tests/integration/` that exercises the end‑to‑end happy path.
   - Error paths for those flows are covered either by integration tests or focused unit tests.
5. **Zero regressions** – coverage cannot silently drop without CI failure; any intentional decrease must be justified in the PR description and accompanied by new tests elsewhere.
6. **Docs stay in sync** – [TEST_COVERAGE.md](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/docs/TEST_COVERAGE.md:0:0-0:0) and [TEST_AUDIT.md](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/docs/TEST_AUDIT.md:0:0-0:0) are fresh and committed.
7. **CI thresholds are treated as a floor, not the goal** – local work aims for the stricter targets above (95%+ core logic, 75–90%+ key UI) even though Vite/CI enforce lower numeric minimums.

---

## Testing Phases

These phases describe **how we structure test work**, not current numeric coverage.

### Phase 1: Core Logic (Critical)

**Goal:** Cover business logic that doesn’t require React rendering.  
**Examples:**

- `services/gemini/*` – agent orchestration, prompts, token guards, parsing.
- `services/manuscriptParser.ts`, `services/manuscriptIndexer.ts` – manuscript parsing/indexing.
- `services/pdfExport.ts` – export pipeline.
- `config/*` – API/model configuration.

Most of these modules now have strong coverage; new logic should follow the same pattern.

### Phase 2: State Management (High)

**Goal:** Verify state machines, stores, and contexts.

- Zustand stores:
  - `features/project/store/useProjectStore.ts`
  - `features/settings/store/useSettingsStore.ts`
- React contexts:
  - `features/shared/context/EditorContext.tsx`
  - `features/shared/context/EngineContext.tsx`
  - `features/shared/context/UsageContext.tsx`
  - `features/analysis/context/AnalysisContext.tsx`

New stateful modules should add tests alongside their context/store files.

### Phase 3: Custom Hooks (High)

**Goal:** Cover hooks with `renderHook` and realistic mocks.

Key hook families:

- Agent + editor:
  - `features/agent/hooks/useAgentService.ts`
  - `features/agent/hooks/useAgenticEditor.ts`
- Editor:
  - `features/editor/hooks/useMagicEditor.ts`
  - `features/editor/hooks/useDocumentHistory.ts`
  - `features/editor/hooks/useBranching.ts`
  - `features/editor/hooks/useInlineComments.ts`
  - `features/editor/hooks/useEditorSelection.ts`
  - `features/editor/hooks/useAutoResize.ts`
- Shared & voice:
  - `features/shared/hooks/useDraftSmithEngine.ts`
  - `features/shared/hooks/usePlotSuggestions.ts`
  - `features/shared/hooks/useViewportCollision.ts`
  - `features/voice/hooks/useVoiceSession.ts`
  - `features/voice/hooks/useTextToSpeech.ts`
  - `features/voice/hooks/useAudioController.ts`

When adding new hooks, follow the same pattern: unit-test decision logic and side effects.

For the agent layer specifically, the shared Gemini tool-call loop and its orchestrators are covered by:

- `tests/services/core/agentToolLoop.test.ts` – pure helper loop behavior (tool rounds, abort paths).
- `tests/services/core/AgentController.test.ts` – `DefaultAgentController` usage of the loop and state transitions.
- `tests/hooks/useAgentOrchestrator.test.ts` – AppBrain-powered hook behavior, including tool round-trips and abort handling.

### Phase 4: React Components (Medium)

**Goal:** Render tests + key user interactions per component.

Focus on:

- Rich editor UI:
  - [features/editor/components/RichTextEditor.tsx](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/features/editor/components/RichTextEditor.tsx:0:0-0:0)
  - [features/editor/components/MagicBar.tsx](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/features/editor/components/MagicBar.tsx:0:0-0:0)
  - [features/editor/components/CommentCard.tsx](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/features/editor/components/CommentCard.tsx:0:0-0:0)
  - [features/editor/components/EditorWorkspace.tsx](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/features/editor/components/EditorWorkspace.tsx:0:0-0:0)
- Agent / analysis UI:
  - `features/agent/components/ChatInterface.tsx`
  - `features/analysis/components/AnalysisPanel.tsx`
- Project & visualization:
  - `features/project/components/ProjectDashboard.tsx`
  - `features/project/components/ImportWizard.tsx`
  - `features/lore/components/LoreManager.tsx`
  - `features/lore/components/KnowledgeGraph.tsx`
  - `features/voice/components/VoiceMode.tsx`

Tests should exercise **real user flows** (clicks, keyboard shortcuts, state transitions), not just snapshots.

### Phase 5: Integration Flows (Lower Volume, High Value)

**Goal:** End‑to‑end flows without a browser, using real stores + mocks at the boundaries.

Representative flows:

- Project lifecycle:
  - Create project → add chapter → save → reopen.
- Analysis:
  - Request analysis → receive results → render dashboards/panels.
- Agent:
  - Chat request → AI response → manuscript edit applied.

Existing tests in [tests/integration/](cci:7://file:///c:/Users/dmedl/Projects/Quill%20AI/tests/integration:0:0-0:0) cover core flows; new high‑level features should add similar integration tests.

---

## Testing Patterns

### 1. Service Mocking (Gemini API)

```typescript
// tests/mocks/geminiClient.ts
vi.mock('@/services/gemini/client', () => ({
  getClient: () => ({
    models: { generateContent: vi.fn() }
  })
}));
